docs/content/docs/reference/pulse/queries.mdx, before:

---
title: "Queries"
description: "Query, mutation, and infinite query APIs"
---

## Types

### QueryKey

```python
QueryKey: TypeAlias = tuple[Hashable, ...]
```

Tuple of hashable values identifying a query in the store.

### QueryStatus

```python
QueryStatus: TypeAlias = Literal["loading", "success", "error"]
```

### ActionResult

```python
ActionResult: TypeAlias = ActionSuccess[T] | ActionError
```

#### ActionSuccess

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ActionSuccess(Generic[T]):
    data: T
    status: Literal["success"] = "success"
```

#### ActionError

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ActionError:
    error: Exception
    status: Literal["error"] = "error"
```

---

## @query

Decorator for async data fetching on State methods.

```python
@overload
def query(
    fn: Callable[[TState], Awaitable[T]],
    *,
    stale_time: float = 0.0,
    gc_time: float | None = 300.0,
    refetch_interval: float | None = None,
    keep_previous_data: bool = False,
    retries: int = 3,
    retry_delay: float | None = None,
    initial_data_updated_at: float | datetime | None = None,
    enabled: bool = True,
    fetch_on_mount: bool = True,
    key: QueryKey | None = None,
) -> QueryProperty[T, TState]: ...
```

### Parameters

| Parameter | Type | Default | Description |
|-----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `stale_time` | `float` | `0.0` | Seconds before data is considered stale |
| `gc_time` | `float \| None` | `300.0` | Seconds to keep unused query in cache |
| `refetch_interval` | `float \| None` | `None` | Auto-refetch interval in seconds |
| `keep_previous_data` | `bool` | `False` | Keep previous data while refetching |
| `retries` | `int` | `3` | Number of retry attempts |
| `retry_delay` | `float \| None` | `2.0` | Delay between retries in seconds |
| `initial_data_updated_at` | `float \| datetime \| None` | `None` | Timestamp for initial data staleness |
| `enabled` | `bool` | `True` | Whether query is enabled |
| `fetch_on_mount` | `bool` | `True` | Fetch when component mounts |
| `key` | `QueryKey \| None` | `None` | Static key for shared queries |

### Basic Usage

```python
class UserState(ps.State):
    user_id: str = ""

    @ps.query
    async def user(self) -> User:
        return await api.get_user(self.user_id)
```

### Keyed Query (Shared)

Use `.key` decorator to share query results across instances:

```python
class UserState(ps.State):
    user_id: str = ""

    @ps.query
    async def user(self) -> User:
        return await api.get_user(self.user_id)

    @user.key
    def _user_key(self):
        return ("user", self.user_id)
```

Or with static key:

```python
@ps.query(key=("users", "current"))
async def current_user(self) -> User:
    return await api.get_current_user()
```

### Decorators

#### `@query_prop.key`

Define dynamic query key:

```python
@my_query.key
def _key(self) -> QueryKey:
    return ("resource", self.id)
```

#### `@query_prop.initial_data`

Provide initial data:

```python
@my_query.initial_data
def _initial(self) -> T:
    return default_value
```

#### `@query_prop.on_success`

Handle successful fetch:

```python
@my_query.on_success
def _on_success(self, data: T):
    self.last_fetched = time.time()
```

#### `@query_prop.on_error`

Handle fetch error:

```python
@my_query.on_error
def _on_error(self, error: Exception):
    logger.error(f"Failed: {error}")
```

---

## QueryResult

Result object returned when accessing a query property. Type varies based on whether query is keyed.

### Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `data` | `T \| None` | Query data |
| `error` | `Exception \| None` | Last error |
| `status` | `QueryStatus` | Current status |
| `is_loading` | `bool` | Status is "loading" |
| `is_success` | `bool` | Status is "success" |
| `is_error` | `bool` | Status is "error" |
| `is_fetching` | `bool` | Currently fetching |
| `is_scheduled` | `bool` | Fetch is scheduled |

### Methods

#### `async refetch(cancel_refetch: bool = True) -> ActionResult[T]`

Re-run the query. If `cancel_refetch=True`, cancels any in-flight request.

```python
result = await state.user.refetch()
if result.status == "success":
    print(result.data)
```

#### `async wait() -> ActionResult[T]`

Wait for the current query to complete.

#### `invalidate() -> None`

Mark the query as stale and trigger a refetch.

```python
state.user.invalidate()
```

#### `set_data(data: T | Callable[[T | None], T]) -> None`

Optimistically set data without fetching.

```python
state.user.set_data(lambda prev: {**prev, "name": "Updated"})
```

#### `set_initial_data(data: T | Callable[[], T], *, updated_at: float | datetime | None = None) -> None`

Seed initial data while still in loading state.

#### `set_error(error: Exception) -> None`

Set error state on the query.

#### `enable() -> None`

Enable the query.

#### `disable() -> None`

Disable the query, preventing fetches.

---

## @mutation

Decorator for async mutations (write operations) on State methods.

```python
@overload
def mutation(
    fn: Callable[Concatenate[TState, P], Awaitable[T]],
) -> MutationProperty[T, TState, P]: ...
```

### Usage

```python
class UserState(ps.State):
    @ps.mutation
    async def update_name(self, name: str) -> User:
        return await api.update_user(name=name)
```

### Decorators

#### `@mutation_prop.on_success`

```python
@update_name.on_success
def _on_success(self, data: User):
    self.user.invalidate()
```

#### `@mutation_prop.on_error`

```python
@update_name.on_error
def _on_error(self, error: Exception):
    logger.error(f"Update failed: {error}")
```

---

## MutationResult

Result object returned when accessing a mutation property.

### Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `data` | `T \| None` | Last mutation result |
| `error` | `Exception \| None` | Last error |
| `is_running` | `bool` | Mutation in progress |

### Calling

Mutations are callable:

```python
result = await state.update_name("New Name")
```

---

## @infinite_query

Decorator for paginated queries.

```python
@overload
def infinite_query(
    fn: Callable[[TState, TParam], Awaitable[T]],
    *,
    initial_page_param: TParam,
    max_pages: int = 0,
    stale_time: float = 0.0,
    gc_time: float | None = 300.0,
    refetch_interval: float | None = None,
    keep_previous_data: bool = False,
    retries: int = 3,
    retry_delay: float | None = None,
    initial_data_updated_at: float | datetime | None = None,
    enabled: bool = True,
    fetch_on_mount: bool = True,
    key: QueryKey | None = None,
) -> InfiniteQueryProperty[T, TParam, TState]: ...
```

### Parameters

| Parameter | Type | Default | Description |
|-----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `initial_page_param` | `TParam` | required | First page parameter |
| `max_pages` | `int` | `0` | Max pages to keep (0 = unlimited) |
| (other parameters same as `@query`)

### Usage

```python
class FeedState(ps.State):
    @ps.infinite_query(initial_page_param=None, key=("feed",))
    async def posts(self, cursor: str | None) -> list[Post]:
        return await api.get_posts(cursor=cursor)

    @posts.key
    def _posts_key(self):
        return ("feed", self.feed_type)

    @posts.get_next_page_param
    def _next_cursor(self, pages: list[Page]) -> str | None:
        if not pages:
            return None
        last = pages[-1]
        return last.data[-1].id if last.data else None

    @posts.get_previous_page_param
    def _prev_cursor(self, pages: list[Page]) -> str | None:
        if not pages:
            return None
        first = pages[0]
        return first.data[0].id if first.data else None
```

### Required Decorators

#### `@infinite_query_prop.key`

Define the query key (required for infinite queries):

```python
@my_query.key
def _key(self) -> QueryKey:
    return ("feed", self.feed_type)
```

#### `@infinite_query_prop.get_next_page_param`

Define how to get the next page parameter:

```python
@my_query.get_next_page_param
def _next(self, pages: list[Page[T, TParam]]) -> TParam | None:
    return pages[-1].next_cursor if pages else None
```

### Optional Decorators

#### `@infinite_query_prop.get_previous_page_param`

Define how to get the previous page parameter (for bi-directional pagination).

#### `@infinite_query_prop.on_success`

Handle successful fetch.

#### `@infinite_query_prop.on_error`

Handle fetch error.

---

## InfiniteQueryResult

Result object for infinite queries.

### Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `data` | `list[Page[T, TParam]] \| None` | All pages |
| `pages` | `list[T] \| None` | Page data only |
| `page_params` | `list[TParam] \| None` | Page parameters |
| `error` | `Exception \| None` | Last error |
| `status` | `QueryStatus` | Current status |
| `is_loading` | `bool` | Status is "loading" |
| `is_success` | `bool` | Status is "success" |
| `is_error` | `bool` | Status is "error" |
| `is_fetching` | `bool` | Currently fetching |
| `has_next_page` | `bool` | More pages available |
| `has_previous_page` | `bool` | Previous pages available |
| `is_fetching_next_page` | `bool` | Fetching next page |
| `is_fetching_previous_page` | `bool` | Fetching previous page |

### Methods

#### `async fetch_next_page(*, cancel_fetch: bool = False) -> ActionResult[Page | None]`

Fetch the next page.

```python
result = await state.posts.fetch_next_page()
```

#### `async fetch_previous_page(*, cancel_fetch: bool = False) -> ActionResult[Page | None]`

Fetch the previous page.

#### `async fetch_page(page_param: TParam, *, cancel_fetch: bool = False) -> ActionResult[T | None]`

Refetch a specific page by its parameter.

#### `async refetch(*, cancel_fetch: bool = False, refetch_page: Callable | None = None) -> ActionResult[list[Page]]`

Refetch all pages. Optional `refetch_page` predicate: `(data, index, all_data) -> bool`.

#### `async wait() -> ActionResult[list[Page]]`

Wait for current fetch to complete.

#### `invalidate() -> None`

Mark as stale and trigger refetch.

#### `set_data(pages: list[Page] | Callable, updated_at: float | datetime | None = None) -> None`

Set pages directly.

#### `set_initial_data(pages: list[Page] | Callable, updated_at: float | datetime | None = None) -> None`

Seed initial data.

#### `enable() / disable() -> None`

Enable/disable the query.

---

## Page

Named tuple for infinite query pages.

```python
class Page(NamedTuple, Generic[T, TParam]):
    data: T
    param: TParam
```

Commit message:

Add ensure() for queries and jump-to-page infinite fetch (#64)

docs/content/docs/reference/pulse/queries.mdx, after:

---
title: "Queries"
description: "Query, mutation, and infinite query APIs"
---

## Types

### QueryKey

```python
QueryKey: TypeAlias = tuple[Hashable, ...]
```

Tuple of hashable values identifying a query in the store.

### QueryStatus

```python
QueryStatus: TypeAlias = Literal["loading", "success", "error"]
```

### ActionResult

```python
ActionResult: TypeAlias = ActionSuccess[T] | ActionError
```

#### ActionSuccess

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ActionSuccess(Generic[T]):
    data: T
    status: Literal["success"] = "success"
```

#### ActionError

```python
@dataclass(slots=True, frozen=True)
class ActionError:
    error: Exception
    status: Literal["error"] = "error"
```

---

## @query

Decorator for async data fetching on State methods.

```python
@overload
def query(
    fn: Callable[[TState], Awaitable[T]],
    *,
    stale_time: float = 0.0,
    gc_time: float | None = 300.0,
    refetch_interval: float | None = None,
    keep_previous_data: bool = False,
    retries: int = 3,
    retry_delay: float | None = None,
    initial_data_updated_at: float | datetime | None = None,
    enabled: bool = True,
    fetch_on_mount: bool = True,
    key: QueryKey | None = None,
) -> QueryProperty[T, TState]: ...
```

### Parameters

| Parameter | Type | Default | Description |
|-----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `stale_time` | `float` | `0.0` | Seconds before data is considered stale |
| `gc_time` | `float \| None` | `300.0` | Seconds to keep unused query in cache |
| `refetch_interval` | `float \| None` | `None` | Auto-refetch interval in seconds |
| `keep_previous_data` | `bool` | `False` | Keep previous data while refetching |
| `retries` | `int` | `3` | Number of retry attempts |
| `retry_delay` | `float \| None` | `2.0` | Delay between retries in seconds |
| `initial_data_updated_at` | `float \| datetime \| None` | `None` | Timestamp for initial data staleness |
| `enabled` | `bool` | `True` | Whether query is enabled |
| `fetch_on_mount` | `bool` | `True` | Fetch when component mounts |
| `key` | `QueryKey \| None` | `None` | Static key for shared queries |

### Basic Usage

```python
class UserState(ps.State):
    user_id: str = ""

    @ps.query
    async def user(self) -> User:
        return await api.get_user(self.user_id)
```

### Keyed Query (Shared)

Use `.key` decorator to share query results across instances:

```python
class UserState(ps.State):
    user_id: str = ""

    @ps.query
    async def user(self) -> User:
        return await api.get_user(self.user_id)

    @user.key
    def _user_key(self):
        return ("user", self.user_id)
```

Or with static key:

```python
@ps.query(key=("users", "current"))
async def current_user(self) -> User:
    return await api.get_current_user()
```

### Decorators

#### `@query_prop.key`

Define dynamic query key:

```python
@my_query.key
def _key(self) -> QueryKey:
    return ("resource", self.id)
```

#### `@query_prop.initial_data`

Provide initial data:

```python
@my_query.initial_data
def _initial(self) -> T:
    return default_value
```

#### `@query_prop.on_success`

Handle successful fetch:

```python
@my_query.on_success
def _on_success(self, data: T):
    self.last_fetched = time.time()
```

#### `@query_prop.on_error`

Handle fetch error:

```python
@my_query.on_error
def _on_error(self, error: Exception):
    logger.error(f"Failed: {error}")
```

---

## QueryResult

Result object returned when accessing a query property. Type varies based on whether query is keyed.

### Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `data` | `T \| None` | Query data |
| `error` | `Exception \| None` | Last error |
| `status` | `QueryStatus` | Current status |
| `is_loading` | `bool` | Status is "loading" |
| `is_success` | `bool` | Status is "success" |
| `is_error` | `bool` | Status is "error" |
| `is_fetching` | `bool` | Currently fetching |
| `is_scheduled` | `bool` | Fetch is scheduled |

### Methods

#### `async refetch(cancel_refetch: bool = True) -> ActionResult[T]`

Re-run the query. If `cancel_refetch=True`, cancels any in-flight request.

```python
result = await state.user.refetch()
if result.status == "success":
    print(result.data)
```

#### `async wait() -> ActionResult[T]`

Wait for the current in-flight fetch to complete. Does not start a fetch.

#### `async ensure() -> ActionResult[T]`

Start the initial fetch if needed, then wait for completion.

#### `invalidate() -> None`

Mark the query as stale and trigger a refetch.

```python
state.user.invalidate()
```

#### `set_data(data: T | Callable[[T | None], T]) -> None`

Optimistically set data without fetching.

```python
state.user.set_data(lambda prev: {**prev, "name": "Updated"})
```

#### `set_initial_data(data: T | Callable[[], T], *, updated_at: float | datetime | None = None) -> None`

Seed initial data while still in loading state.

#### `set_error(error: Exception) -> None`

Set error state on the query.

#### `enable() -> None`

Enable the query.

#### `disable() -> None`

Disable the query, preventing fetches.

---

## @mutation

Decorator for async mutations (write operations) on State methods.

```python
@overload
def mutation(
    fn: Callable[Concatenate[TState, P], Awaitable[T]],
) -> MutationProperty[T, TState, P]: ...
```

### Usage

```python
class UserState(ps.State):
    @ps.mutation
    async def update_name(self, name: str) -> User:
        return await api.update_user(name=name)
```

### Decorators

#### `@mutation_prop.on_success`

```python
@update_name.on_success
def _on_success(self, data: User):
    self.user.invalidate()
```

#### `@mutation_prop.on_error`

```python
@update_name.on_error
def _on_error(self, error: Exception):
    logger.error(f"Update failed: {error}")
```

---

## MutationResult

Result object returned when accessing a mutation property.

### Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `data` | `T \| None` | Last mutation result |
| `error` | `Exception \| None` | Last error |
| `is_running` | `bool` | Mutation in progress |

### Calling

Mutations are callable:

```python
result = await state.update_name("New Name")
```

---

## @infinite_query

Decorator for paginated queries.

```python
@overload
def infinite_query(
    fn: Callable[[TState, TParam], Awaitable[T]],
    *,
    initial_page_param: TParam,
    max_pages: int = 0,
    stale_time: float = 0.0,
    gc_time: float | None = 300.0,
    refetch_interval: float | None = None,
    keep_previous_data: bool = False,
    retries: int = 3,
    retry_delay: float | None = None,
    initial_data_updated_at: float | datetime | None = None,
    enabled: bool = True,
    fetch_on_mount: bool = True,
    key: QueryKey | None = None,
) -> InfiniteQueryProperty[T, TParam, TState]: ...
```

### Parameters

| Parameter | Type | Default | Description |
|-----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `initial_page_param` | `TParam` | required | First page parameter |
| `max_pages` | `int` | `0` | Max pages to keep (0 = unlimited) |
| (other parameters same as `@query`)

### Usage

```python
class FeedState(ps.State):
    @ps.infinite_query(initial_page_param=None, key=("feed",))
    async def posts(self, cursor: str | None) -> list[Post]:
        return await api.get_posts(cursor=cursor)

    @posts.key
    def _posts_key(self):
        return ("feed", self.feed_type)

    @posts.get_next_page_param
    def _next_cursor(self, pages: list[Page]) -> str | None:
        if not pages:
            return None
        last = pages[-1]
        return last.data[-1].id if last.data else None

    @posts.get_previous_page_param
    def _prev_cursor(self, pages: list[Page]) -> str | None:
        if not pages:
            return None
        first = pages[0]
        return first.data[0].id if first.data else None
```

### Required Decorators

#### `@infinite_query_prop.key`

Define the query key (required for infinite queries):

```python
@my_query.key
def _key(self) -> QueryKey:
    return ("feed", self.feed_type)
```

#### `@infinite_query_prop.get_next_page_param`

Define how to get the next page parameter:

```python
@my_query.get_next_page_param
def _next(self, pages: list[Page[T, TParam]]) -> TParam | None:
    return pages[-1].next_cursor if pages else None
```

### Optional Decorators

#### `@infinite_query_prop.get_previous_page_param`

Define how to get the previous page parameter (for bi-directional pagination).

#### `@infinite_query_prop.on_success`

Handle successful fetch.

#### `@infinite_query_prop.on_error`

Handle fetch error.

---

## InfiniteQueryResult

Result object for infinite queries.

### Properties

| Property | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `data` | `list[Page[T, TParam]] \| None` | All pages |
| `pages` | `list[T] \| None` | Page data only |
| `page_params` | `list[TParam] \| None` | Page parameters |
| `error` | `Exception \| None` | Last error |
| `status` | `QueryStatus` | Current status |
| `is_loading` | `bool` | Status is "loading" |
| `is_success` | `bool` | Status is "success" |
| `is_error` | `bool` | Status is "error" |
| `is_fetching` | `bool` | Currently fetching |
| `has_next_page` | `bool` | More pages available |
| `has_previous_page` | `bool` | Previous pages available |
| `is_fetching_next_page` | `bool` | Fetching next page |
| `is_fetching_previous_page` | `bool` | Fetching previous page |

### Methods

#### `async fetch_next_page(*, cancel_fetch: bool = False) -> ActionResult[Page | None]`

Fetch the next page.

```python
result = await state.posts.fetch_next_page()
```

#### `async fetch_previous_page(*, cancel_fetch: bool = False) -> ActionResult[Page | None]`

Fetch the previous page.

#### `async fetch_page(page_param: TParam, *, cancel_fetch: bool = False) -> ActionResult[T | None]`

Refetch a specific page by its parameter.

#### `async refetch(*, cancel_fetch: bool = False, refetch_page: Callable | None = None) -> ActionResult[list[Page]]`

Refetch all pages. Optional `refetch_page` predicate: `(data, index, all_data) -> bool`.

#### `async wait() -> ActionResult[list[Page]]`

Wait for the current in-flight fetch to complete. Does not start a fetch.

#### `async ensure() -> ActionResult[list[Page]]`

Start the initial fetch if needed, then wait for completion.

#### `invalidate() -> None`

Mark as stale and trigger refetch.

#### `set_data(pages: list[Page] | Callable, updated_at: float | datetime | None = None) -> None`

Set pages directly.

#### `set_initial_data(pages: list[Page] | Callable, updated_at: float | datetime | None = None) -> None`

Seed initial data.

#### `enable() / disable() -> None`

Enable/disable the query.

---

## Page

Named tuple for infinite query pages.

```python
class Page(NamedTuple, Generic[T, TParam]):
    data: T
    param: TParam
```
