docs/content/docs/reference/pulse/refs.mdx, before:

---
title: "Refs"
description: "Imperative DOM operations via server-side ref handles"
---

Server-side handles for imperative DOM operations. Commands are sent to the client over WebSocket.

## Functions

### ref

```python
def ref(
    *,
    key: str | None = None,
    on_mount: Callable[[], Any] | None = None,
    on_unmount: Callable[[], Any] | None = None,
) -> Ref
```

Create or retrieve a stable ref handle for a component.

If called outside render, a new handle is created using the active render session.

**Parameters:**
- `key` - Optional key to disambiguate multiple refs at the same callsite (required in loops).
- `on_mount` - Optional handler called when the ref mounts.
- `on_unmount` - Optional handler called when the ref unmounts.

**Returns:** `Ref` instance.

**Raises:**
- `TypeError` if `key` is not a string.
- `ValueError` if `key` is an empty string.
- `RuntimeError` if no active render session is available.

```python
import pulse as ps

@ps.component
def AutoFocusInput():
    input_ref = ps.ref(on_mount=lambda: input_ref.focus())
    return ps.input(ref=input_ref, placeholder="Auto-focused")
```

#### Ref callbacks

You can also pass a ref callback to an element. The callback receives the `Ref`
on mount and `None` on unmount.

```python
import pulse as ps

@ps.component
def WithRefCallback():
    def on_ref(value: ps.Ref | None):
        if value:
            value.focus()

    return ps.input(ref=on_ref)
```

## Classes

### Ref

Server-side handle for a client DOM ref.

#### Attributes

| Attribute | Type | Description |
|-----------|------|-------------|
| `id` | `str` | Unique ref identifier |
| `channel_id` | `str` | Associated channel ID |
| `mounted` | `bool` | Whether the ref is currently mounted |

#### Lifecycle Methods

##### wait_mounted

```python
async def wait_mounted(self, timeout: float | None = None) -> None
```

Wait for the ref to mount.

**Parameters:**
- `timeout` - Maximum time to wait in seconds. `None` waits indefinitely.

**Raises:** `RefTimeout` if timeout expires before mount.

```python
await input_ref.wait_mounted(timeout=2.0)
input_ref.focus()
```

##### on_mount

```python
def on_mount(self, handler: Callable[[], Any]) -> Callable[[], None]
```

Register a handler called when the ref mounts.

**Parameters:**
- `handler` - Callback function. Can be sync or async.

**Returns:** Callable that removes the handler when invoked.

##### on_unmount

```python
def on_unmount(self, handler: Callable[[], Any]) -> Callable[[], None]
```

Register a handler called when the ref unmounts.

**Parameters:**
- `handler` - Callback function. Can be sync or async.

**Returns:** Callable that removes the handler when invoked.

#### Fire-and-Forget Methods

These methods send commands without waiting for a response. They raise `RefNotMounted` if called before the ref is mounted.

##### focus

```python
def focus(self, *, prevent_scroll: bool | None = None) -> None
```

Focus the element.

**Parameters:**
- `prevent_scroll` - If `True`, prevents scrolling the element into view.

##### blur

```python
def blur(self) -> None
```

Remove focus from the element.

##### click

```python
def click(self) -> None
```

Programmatically click the element.

##### submit

```python
def submit(self) -> None
```

Submit the form element.

##### reset

```python
def reset(self) -> None
```

Reset the form element.

##### scroll_into_view

```python
def scroll_into_view(
    self,
    *,
    behavior: str | None = None,
    block: str | None = None,
    inline: str | None = None,
) -> None
```

Scroll the element into view.

**Parameters:**
- `behavior` - `"auto"` or `"smooth"`.
- `block` - Vertical alignment: `"start"`, `"center"`, `"end"`, `"nearest"`.
- `inline` - Horizontal alignment: `"start"`, `"center"`, `"end"`, `"nearest"`.

##### scroll_to

```python
def scroll_to(
    self,
    *,
    top: float | int | None = None,
    left: float | int | None = None,
    behavior: str | None = None,
) -> None
```

Scroll to a position within the element.

**Parameters:**
- `top` - Vertical scroll position in pixels.
- `left` - Horizontal scroll position in pixels.
- `behavior` - `"auto"` or `"smooth"`.

##### scroll_by

```python
def scroll_by(
    self,
    *,
    top: float | int | None = None,
    left: float | int | None = None,
    behavior: str | None = None,
) -> None
```

Scroll by a relative amount within the element.

**Parameters:**
- `top` - Vertical scroll delta in pixels.
- `left` - Horizontal scroll delta in pixels.
- `behavior` - `"auto"` or `"smooth"`.

##### select

```python
def select(self) -> None
```

Select all text in the input or textarea.

##### set_selection_range

```python
def set_selection_range(
    self, start: int, end: int, *, direction: str | None = None
) -> None
```

Set the selection range in an input or textarea.

**Parameters:**
- `start` - Selection start index.
- `end` - Selection end index.
- `direction` - `"forward"`, `"backward"`, or `"none"`.

#### Request-Response Methods

These async methods send a request and await the response. They raise `RefNotMounted` if called before mount.

##### measure

```python
async def measure(self, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> dict[str, Any] | None
```

Get the element's bounding client rect.

**Parameters:**
- `timeout` - Request timeout in seconds.

**Returns:** Dictionary with `x`, `y`, `width`, `height`, `top`, `right`, `bottom`, `left`.

```python
rect = await element_ref.measure()
print(f"Size: {rect['width']}x{rect['height']}")
```

##### get_value

```python
async def get_value(self, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> Any
```

Get the element's value (for inputs) or text content.

##### set_value

```python
async def set_value(self, value: Any, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> Any
```

Set the element's value.

**Returns:** The new value after setting.

##### get_text

```python
async def get_text(self, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> str | None
```

Get the element's text content.

##### set_text

```python
async def set_text(self, text: str, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> str | None
```

Set the element's text content.

**Returns:** The new text content after setting.

##### get_prop

```python
async def get_prop(self, name: str, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> Any
```

Get a DOM property value.

**Parameters:**
- `name` - Property name. Must be one of the allowed properties.

**Allowed properties:** `value`, `checked`, `disabled`, `readOnly`, `selectedIndex`, `selectionStart`, `selectionEnd`, `selectionDirection`, `scrollTop`, `scrollLeft`, `scrollHeight`, `scrollWidth`, `clientWidth`, `clientHeight`, `offsetWidth`, `offsetHeight`, `innerText`, `textContent`, `className`, `id`, `name`, `type`, `tabIndex`

```python
is_checked = await checkbox_ref.get_prop("checked")
scroll_pos = await container_ref.get_prop("scrollTop")
```

##### set_prop

```python
async def set_prop(self, name: str, value: Any, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> Any
```

Set a DOM property value.

**Parameters:**
- `name` - Property name. Must be one of the settable properties.
- `value` - New value.

**Returns:** The new property value after setting.

**Settable properties:** `value`, `checked`, `disabled`, `readOnly`, `selectedIndex`, `selectionStart`, `selectionEnd`, `selectionDirection`, `scrollTop`, `scrollLeft`, `className`, `id`, `name`, `type`, `tabIndex`

```python
await input_ref.set_prop("value", "New text")
await checkbox_ref.set_prop("checked", True)
```

##### get_attr

```python
async def get_attr(self, name: str, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> str | None
```

Get an HTML attribute value.

**Parameters:**
- `name` - Attribute name. Cannot start with "on" (event handlers).

```python
href = await link_ref.get_attr("href")
data = await div_ref.get_attr("data-id")
```

##### set_attr

```python
async def set_attr(
    self, name: str, value: Any, *, timeout: float | None = None
) -> str | None
```

Set an HTML attribute value.

**Parameters:**
- `name` - Attribute name. Cannot start with "on".
- `value` - New value. `None` removes the attribute.

**Returns:** The new attribute value after setting.

##### remove_attr

```python
async def remove_attr(self, name: str, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> None
```

Remove an HTML attribute.

##### set_style

```python
async def set_style(
    self, styles: dict[str, Any], *, timeout: float | None = None
) -> None
```

Set inline styles on the element.

**Parameters:**
- `styles` - Dictionary of style property names to values. Values can be strings, numbers, or `None` (to remove).

```python
await element_ref.set_style({
    "backgroundColor": "red",
    "font-size": "16px",
    "opacity": 0.5,
    "display": None,  # Removes the style
})
```

## Exceptions

### RefNotMounted

```python
class RefNotMounted(RuntimeError)
```

Raised when a ref operation is attempted before the ref is mounted.

```python
from pulse import RefNotMounted

try:
    input_ref.focus()
except RefNotMounted:
    print("Ref not mounted yet")
```

### RefTimeout

```python
class RefTimeout(asyncio.TimeoutError)
```

Raised when `wait_mounted()` times out.

```python
from pulse import RefTimeout

try:
    await input_ref.wait_mounted(timeout=2.0)
except RefTimeout:
    print("Timed out waiting for mount")
```

## See also

- [Refs (explanation)](/docs/advanced/refs) - When to use refs and how they work
- [Channels](/docs/reference/pulse/channels) - Low-level communication channels

Commit message:

Tie ref lifecycle to element

docs/content/docs/reference/pulse/refs.mdx, after:

---
title: "Refs"
description: "Imperative DOM operations via server-side ref handles"
---

Server-side handles for imperative DOM operations. Commands are sent to the client over WebSocket.

## Functions

### ref

```python
def ref(
    *,
    key: str | None = None,
    on_mount: Callable[[], Any] | None = None,
    on_unmount: Callable[[], Any] | None = None,
) -> Ref
```

Create or retrieve a stable ref handle for a component.

If called outside render, a new handle is created. The handle attaches when you pass it to an element and detaches on unmount.

**Parameters:**
- `key` - Optional key to disambiguate multiple refs at the same callsite (required in loops).
- `on_mount` - Optional handler called when the ref mounts.
- `on_unmount` - Optional handler called when the ref unmounts.

**Returns:** `Ref` instance.

**Raises:**
- `TypeError` if `key` is not a string.
- `ValueError` if `key` is an empty string.

```python
import pulse as ps

@ps.component
def AutoFocusInput():
    input_ref = ps.ref(on_mount=lambda: input_ref.focus())
    return ps.input(ref=input_ref, placeholder="Auto-focused")
```

#### Ref callbacks

You can also pass a ref callback to an element. The callback receives the `Ref`
on mount and `None` on unmount.

```python
import pulse as ps

@ps.component
def WithRefCallback():
    def on_ref(value: ps.Ref | None):
        if value:
            value.focus()

    return ps.input(ref=on_ref)
```

## Classes

### Ref

Server-side handle for a client DOM ref.

#### Attributes

| Attribute | Type | Description |
|-----------|------|-------------|
| `id` | `str` | Unique ref identifier |
| `channel_id` | `str` | Associated channel ID |
| `mounted` | `bool` | Whether the ref is currently mounted |

#### Lifecycle Methods

##### wait_mounted

```python
async def wait_mounted(self, timeout: float | None = None) -> None
```

Wait for the ref to mount.

**Parameters:**
- `timeout` - Maximum time to wait in seconds. `None` waits indefinitely.

**Raises:** `RefTimeout` if timeout expires before mount.

```python
await input_ref.wait_mounted(timeout=2.0)
input_ref.focus()
```

##### on_mount

```python
def on_mount(self, handler: Callable[[], Any]) -> Callable[[], None]
```

Register a handler called when the ref mounts.

**Parameters:**
- `handler` - Callback function. Can be sync or async.

**Returns:** Callable that removes the handler when invoked.

##### on_unmount

```python
def on_unmount(self, handler: Callable[[], Any]) -> Callable[[], None]
```

Register a handler called when the ref unmounts.

**Parameters:**
- `handler` - Callback function. Can be sync or async.

**Returns:** Callable that removes the handler when invoked.

#### Fire-and-Forget Methods

These methods send commands without waiting for a response. They raise `RefNotMounted` if called before the ref is mounted.

##### focus

```python
def focus(self, *, prevent_scroll: bool | None = None) -> None
```

Focus the element.

**Parameters:**
- `prevent_scroll` - If `True`, prevents scrolling the element into view.

##### blur

```python
def blur(self) -> None
```

Remove focus from the element.

##### click

```python
def click(self) -> None
```

Programmatically click the element.

##### submit

```python
def submit(self) -> None
```

Submit the form element.

##### reset

```python
def reset(self) -> None
```

Reset the form element.

##### scroll_into_view

```python
def scroll_into_view(
    self,
    *,
    behavior: str | None = None,
    block: str | None = None,
    inline: str | None = None,
) -> None
```

Scroll the element into view.

**Parameters:**
- `behavior` - `"auto"` or `"smooth"`.
- `block` - Vertical alignment: `"start"`, `"center"`, `"end"`, `"nearest"`.
- `inline` - Horizontal alignment: `"start"`, `"center"`, `"end"`, `"nearest"`.

##### scroll_to

```python
def scroll_to(
    self,
    *,
    top: float | int | None = None,
    left: float | int | None = None,
    behavior: str | None = None,
) -> None
```

Scroll to a position within the element.

**Parameters:**
- `top` - Vertical scroll position in pixels.
- `left` - Horizontal scroll position in pixels.
- `behavior` - `"auto"` or `"smooth"`.

##### scroll_by

```python
def scroll_by(
    self,
    *,
    top: float | int | None = None,
    left: float | int | None = None,
    behavior: str | None = None,
) -> None
```

Scroll by a relative amount within the element.

**Parameters:**
- `top` - Vertical scroll delta in pixels.
- `left` - Horizontal scroll delta in pixels.
- `behavior` - `"auto"` or `"smooth"`.

##### select

```python
def select(self) -> None
```

Select all text in the input or textarea.

##### set_selection_range

```python
def set_selection_range(
    self, start: int, end: int, *, direction: str | None = None
) -> None
```

Set the selection range in an input or textarea.

**Parameters:**
- `start` - Selection start index.
- `end` - Selection end index.
- `direction` - `"forward"`, `"backward"`, or `"none"`.

#### Request-Response Methods

These async methods send a request and await the response. They raise `RefNotMounted` if called before mount.

##### measure

```python
async def measure(self, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> dict[str, Any] | None
```

Get the element's bounding client rect.

**Parameters:**
- `timeout` - Request timeout in seconds.

**Returns:** Dictionary with `x`, `y`, `width`, `height`, `top`, `right`, `bottom`, `left`.

```python
rect = await element_ref.measure()
print(f"Size: {rect['width']}x{rect['height']}")
```

##### get_value

```python
async def get_value(self, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> Any
```

Get the element's value (for inputs) or text content.

##### set_value

```python
async def set_value(self, value: Any, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> Any
```

Set the element's value.

**Returns:** The new value after setting.

##### get_text

```python
async def get_text(self, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> str | None
```

Get the element's text content.

##### set_text

```python
async def set_text(self, text: str, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> str | None
```

Set the element's text content.

**Returns:** The new text content after setting.

##### get_prop

```python
async def get_prop(self, name: str, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> Any
```

Get a DOM property value.

**Parameters:**
- `name` - Property name. Must be one of the allowed properties.

**Allowed properties:** `value`, `checked`, `disabled`, `readOnly`, `selectedIndex`, `selectionStart`, `selectionEnd`, `selectionDirection`, `scrollTop`, `scrollLeft`, `scrollHeight`, `scrollWidth`, `clientWidth`, `clientHeight`, `offsetWidth`, `offsetHeight`, `innerText`, `textContent`, `className`, `id`, `name`, `type`, `tabIndex`

```python
is_checked = await checkbox_ref.get_prop("checked")
scroll_pos = await container_ref.get_prop("scrollTop")
```

##### set_prop

```python
async def set_prop(self, name: str, value: Any, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> Any
```

Set a DOM property value.

**Parameters:**
- `name` - Property name. Must be one of the settable properties.
- `value` - New value.

**Returns:** The new property value after setting.

**Settable properties:** `value`, `checked`, `disabled`, `readOnly`, `selectedIndex`, `selectionStart`, `selectionEnd`, `selectionDirection`, `scrollTop`, `scrollLeft`, `className`, `id`, `name`, `type`, `tabIndex`

```python
await input_ref.set_prop("value", "New text")
await checkbox_ref.set_prop("checked", True)
```

##### get_attr

```python
async def get_attr(self, name: str, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> str | None
```

Get an HTML attribute value.

**Parameters:**
- `name` - Attribute name. Cannot start with "on" (event handlers).

```python
href = await link_ref.get_attr("href")
data = await div_ref.get_attr("data-id")
```

##### set_attr

```python
async def set_attr(
    self, name: str, value: Any, *, timeout: float | None = None
) -> str | None
```

Set an HTML attribute value.

**Parameters:**
- `name` - Attribute name. Cannot start with "on".
- `value` - New value. `None` removes the attribute.

**Returns:** The new attribute value after setting.

##### remove_attr

```python
async def remove_attr(self, name: str, *, timeout: float | None = None) -> None
```

Remove an HTML attribute.

##### set_style

```python
async def set_style(
    self, styles: dict[str, Any], *, timeout: float | None = None
) -> None
```

Set inline styles on the element.

**Parameters:**
- `styles` - Dictionary of style property names to values. Values can be strings, numbers, or `None` (to remove).

```python
await element_ref.set_style({
    "backgroundColor": "red",
    "font-size": "16px",
    "opacity": 0.5,
    "display": None,  # Removes the style
})
```

## Exceptions

### RefNotMounted

```python
class RefNotMounted(RuntimeError)
```

Raised when a ref operation is attempted before the ref is mounted.

```python
from pulse import RefNotMounted

try:
    input_ref.focus()
except RefNotMounted:
    print("Ref not mounted yet")
```

### RefTimeout

```python
class RefTimeout(asyncio.TimeoutError)
```

Raised when `wait_mounted()` times out.

```python
from pulse import RefTimeout

try:
    await input_ref.wait_mounted(timeout=2.0)
except RefTimeout:
    print("Timed out waiting for mount")
```

## See also

- [Refs (explanation)](/docs/advanced/refs) - When to use refs and how they work
- [Channels](/docs/reference/pulse/channels) - Low-level communication channels
