docs/content/docs/(core)/concepts/data-fetching.mdx, before:

---
title: "Async and Data Fetching"
---

Most apps need to load data from somewhere—an API, a database, or another async source. Pulse has built-in support for async patterns and provides **queries** and **mutations** to handle the boilerplate: loading states, error handling, caching, and automatic refetching.

## Async fundamentals

Event handlers can be `async` functions. Pulse handles this automatically:

```python
class SearchState(ps.State):
    query: str = ""
    results: list = []
    loading: bool = False

    async def search(self):
        self.loading = True
        self.results = await fetch_from_api(self.query)
        self.loading = False
```

### Automatic batching

State updates are automatically batched between `await` calls. Your UI only rerenders when it makes sense:

```python
async def process(self):
    # These two updates are batched - one rerender
    self.status = "loading"
    self.progress = 0

    await asyncio.sleep(1)

    # These are also batched - one rerender
    self.status = "done"
    self.progress = 100
```

Each group of synchronous updates triggers a single rerender, not one per update.

---

## Queries

You could manage data fetching with plain `async` methods and manual loading flags, but that gets tedious. Queries handle this for you.

Think of it this way:
- **Queries** are for *reading* data (fetching a user profile, loading a list of products)
- **Mutations** are for *writing* data (saving a form, deleting a record)

### Your first query

A query is an async method on a `State` class decorated with `@ps.query`:

```python
import pulse as ps

class UserState(ps.State):
    user_id: int = 1

    @ps.query
    async def user(self):
        await asyncio.sleep(0.5)  # simulate network delay
        return {"id": self.user_id, "name": f"User {self.user_id}"}
```

In your component, access the query like a property. Pulse tracks loading and error states automatically:

```python
@ps.component
def UserProfile():
    with ps.init():
        state = UserState()

    if state.user.is_loading:
        return ps.div("Loading...")

    return ps.div(
        ps.h1(f"Hello, {state.user.data['name']}!"),
        ps.button("Refresh", onClick=state.user.refetch),
    )
```

Notice you didn't have to:
- Create a `loading` boolean and toggle it manually
- Catch exceptions and store them somewhere
- Figure out when to trigger the fetch

The query runs when the component first renders, and you get reactive properties to check its status.

### Checking query status

Every query gives you these properties:

| Property | What it tells you |
|----------|-------------------|
| `data` | The fetched result, or `None` if not yet loaded |
| `is_loading` | `True` during the *first* fetch (use for initial loading spinners) |
| `is_fetching` | `True` during *any* fetch, including refetches (use for refresh indicators) |
| `is_success` | `True` if the last fetch worked |
| `is_error` | `True` if the last fetch failed |
| `error` | The exception object if it failed, otherwise `None` |

**When should you use `is_loading` vs `is_fetching`?** Use `is_loading` for a full loading state on the first load (like a skeleton screen). Use `is_fetching` to show *any* fetch activity, like a subtle spinner during background refetches.

### Controlling queries manually

| Method | When to use it |
|--------|----------------|
| `refetch()` | User clicks a "refresh" button, or you need fresh data after some action |
| `invalidate()` | Mark data as stale so it refetches on next access (lazy refresh) |
| `set_data(...)` | Optimistic updates—show a change immediately before the server confirms |
| `wait()` | In an async callback when you need to await the query result |

### When do queries refetch?

By default, queries **automatically track their dependencies**. If your query reads `self.user_id`, Pulse notices that and refetches whenever `user_id` changes:

```python
@ps.query
async def user(self):
    # Pulse sees you're reading self.user_id
    # When user_id changes, this query refetches automatically
    return await fetch_user(self.user_id)
```

This "just works" for most cases.

### Keyed queries

Sometimes automatic tracking isn't what you want. Maybe you're reading multiple state properties but only want to refetch when one specific value changes:

```python
@ps.query
async def user(self):
    return await fetch_user(self.user_id)

@user.key
def _user_key(self):
    # Only refetch when user_id changes, ignore other state
    return ("user", self.user_id)
```

| Situation | Use |
|-----------|-----|
| Simple case, refetch whenever any dependency changes | Unkeyed (default) |
| Need explicit control over refetch triggers | Keyed query |
| Want to share cached data across components | Keyed query (same key = shared cache) |

### Fine-tuning query behavior

The `@ps.query` decorator accepts options for common scenarios:

```python
@ps.query(
    keep_previous_data=True,  # Show old data while refetching (avoids flicker)
    stale_time=60.0,          # Data is "fresh" for 60 seconds
    retries=3,                # Retry failed requests up to 3 times
    retry_delay=1.0,          # Wait 1 second between retries
    gc_time=300.0,            # Keep cached data around for 5 minutes
)
async def user(self):
    return await fetch_user(self.user_id)
```

| If you want to... | Use this option |
|-------------------|-----------------|
| Avoid UI flicker when switching between items | `keep_previous_data=True` |
| Reduce API calls for data that doesn't change often | `stale_time=60.0` (or longer) |
| Handle flaky network connections | `retries=3, retry_delay=1.0` |
| Keep data in memory longer for fast back-navigation | `gc_time=300.0` |

### Reacting to query results

Use callback decorators when a query succeeds or fails:

```python
@ps.query
async def user(self):
    return await fetch_user(self.user_id)

@user.on_success
def _on_success(self):
    print("User loaded successfully!")

@user.on_error
def _on_error(self):
    print("Failed to load user")
```

### Providing initial data

Show placeholder data immediately while the real fetch happens:

```python
@ps.query
async def user(self):
    return await fetch_user(self.user_id)

@user.initial_data
def _initial_user(self):
    return {"id": 0, "name": "Loading..."}
```

---

## Mutations

While queries are for reading, **mutations** are for writing. They don't run automatically—you call them explicitly:

```python
class UserState(ps.State):
    user_id: int = 1

    @ps.query
    async def user(self):
        return await fetch_user(self.user_id)

    @ps.mutation
    async def update_name(self, new_name: str):
        result = await save_user_name(self.user_id, new_name)
        self.user.invalidate()  # Refresh the query after saving
        return result
```

Use mutations in event handlers:

```python
@ps.component
def EditUser():
    with ps.init():
        state = UserState()

    async def save():
        await state.update_name("New Name")

    return ps.button("Save", onClick=save)
```

### Handling mutation results

Mutations support success and error callbacks:

```python
@ps.mutation
async def update_name(self, new_name: str):
    return await save_user_name(self.user_id, new_name)

@update_name.on_success
def _on_save_success(self, result):
    print(f"Saved: {result}")

@update_name.on_error
def _on_save_error(self, error):
    print(f"Save failed: {error}")
```

### Optimistic updates

Update the display immediately *before* the server responds for the snappiest UI:

```python
async def rename_user():
    # Show the change immediately (optimistic)
    state.user.set_data({"id": state.user_id, "name": "New Name"})

    # Actually save to server
    await state.update_name("New Name")

    # Refetch to make sure we're in sync
    await state.user.refetch()
```

---

## Async effects

Effects can be async, useful for background tasks or periodic updates:

```python
class PollingState(ps.State):
    data: dict = {}

    @ps.effect(lazy=True)
    async def poll(self):
        while True:
            self.data = await fetch_latest()
            await asyncio.sleep(30)

    def start_polling(self):
        self.poll.schedule()

    def stop_polling(self):
        self.poll.cancel()
```

The `lazy=True` option means the effect doesn't run automatically. Use `.schedule()` to start it and `.cancel()` to stop it.

### Controlling tracking in async code

Use `ps.Untrack()` when you need to read state without creating a dependency:

```python
async def save(self):
    with ps.Untrack():
        # Reading these won't cause the effect to rerun
        data = {"name": self.name, "email": self.email}

    await api.save(data)
```

---

## Quick reference

| I want to... | Use |
|--------------|-----|
| Fetch data that updates automatically | `@ps.query` |
| Send data to the server | `@ps.mutation` |
| Show loading state on first load | `query.is_loading` |
| Show loading state on any fetch | `query.is_fetching` |
| Manually refresh data | `query.refetch()` |
| Update UI immediately before server confirms | `query.set_data(...)` |
| Mark data as stale for lazy refresh | `query.invalidate()` |
| Run background async tasks | `@ps.effect(lazy=True)` with `.schedule()` |

## See also

- [Tutorial: Async](/docs/tutorial/08-async)
- [Tutorial: Queries and Mutations](/docs/tutorial/09-queries)

Commit message:

Make wait side-effect free; add ensure

docs/content/docs/(core)/concepts/data-fetching.mdx, after:

---
title: "Async and Data Fetching"
---

Most apps need to load data from somewhere—an API, a database, or another async source. Pulse has built-in support for async patterns and provides **queries** and **mutations** to handle the boilerplate: loading states, error handling, caching, and automatic refetching.

## Async fundamentals

Event handlers can be `async` functions. Pulse handles this automatically:

```python
class SearchState(ps.State):
    query: str = ""
    results: list = []
    loading: bool = False

    async def search(self):
        self.loading = True
        self.results = await fetch_from_api(self.query)
        self.loading = False
```

### Automatic batching

State updates are automatically batched between `await` calls. Your UI only rerenders when it makes sense:

```python
async def process(self):
    # These two updates are batched - one rerender
    self.status = "loading"
    self.progress = 0

    await asyncio.sleep(1)

    # These are also batched - one rerender
    self.status = "done"
    self.progress = 100
```

Each group of synchronous updates triggers a single rerender, not one per update.

---

## Queries

You could manage data fetching with plain `async` methods and manual loading flags, but that gets tedious. Queries handle this for you.

Think of it this way:
- **Queries** are for *reading* data (fetching a user profile, loading a list of products)
- **Mutations** are for *writing* data (saving a form, deleting a record)

### Your first query

A query is an async method on a `State` class decorated with `@ps.query`:

```python
import pulse as ps

class UserState(ps.State):
    user_id: int = 1

    @ps.query
    async def user(self):
        await asyncio.sleep(0.5)  # simulate network delay
        return {"id": self.user_id, "name": f"User {self.user_id}"}
```

In your component, access the query like a property. Pulse tracks loading and error states automatically:

```python
@ps.component
def UserProfile():
    with ps.init():
        state = UserState()

    if state.user.is_loading:
        return ps.div("Loading...")

    return ps.div(
        ps.h1(f"Hello, {state.user.data['name']}!"),
        ps.button("Refresh", onClick=state.user.refetch),
    )
```

Notice you didn't have to:
- Create a `loading` boolean and toggle it manually
- Catch exceptions and store them somewhere
- Figure out when to trigger the fetch

The query runs when the component first renders, and you get reactive properties to check its status.

### Checking query status

Every query gives you these properties:

| Property | What it tells you |
|----------|-------------------|
| `data` | The fetched result, or `None` if not yet loaded |
| `is_loading` | `True` during the *first* fetch (use for initial loading spinners) |
| `is_fetching` | `True` during *any* fetch, including refetches (use for refresh indicators) |
| `is_success` | `True` if the last fetch worked |
| `is_error` | `True` if the last fetch failed |
| `error` | The exception object if it failed, otherwise `None` |

**When should you use `is_loading` vs `is_fetching`?** Use `is_loading` for a full loading state on the first load (like a skeleton screen). Use `is_fetching` to show *any* fetch activity, like a subtle spinner during background refetches.

### Controlling queries manually

| Method | When to use it |
|--------|----------------|
| `refetch()` | User clicks a "refresh" button, or you need fresh data after some action |
| `invalidate()` | Mark data as stale so it refetches on next access (lazy refresh) |
| `set_data(...)` | Optimistic updates—show a change immediately before the server confirms |
| `ensure()` | Start the initial fetch if needed, then wait for the result |
| `wait()` | In an async callback when you need to await an in-flight fetch |

### When do queries refetch?

By default, queries **automatically track their dependencies**. If your query reads `self.user_id`, Pulse notices that and refetches whenever `user_id` changes:

```python
@ps.query
async def user(self):
    # Pulse sees you're reading self.user_id
    # When user_id changes, this query refetches automatically
    return await fetch_user(self.user_id)
```

This "just works" for most cases.

### Keyed queries

Sometimes automatic tracking isn't what you want. Maybe you're reading multiple state properties but only want to refetch when one specific value changes:

```python
@ps.query
async def user(self):
    return await fetch_user(self.user_id)

@user.key
def _user_key(self):
    # Only refetch when user_id changes, ignore other state
    return ("user", self.user_id)
```

| Situation | Use |
|-----------|-----|
| Simple case, refetch whenever any dependency changes | Unkeyed (default) |
| Need explicit control over refetch triggers | Keyed query |
| Want to share cached data across components | Keyed query (same key = shared cache) |

### Fine-tuning query behavior

The `@ps.query` decorator accepts options for common scenarios:

```python
@ps.query(
    keep_previous_data=True,  # Show old data while refetching (avoids flicker)
    stale_time=60.0,          # Data is "fresh" for 60 seconds
    retries=3,                # Retry failed requests up to 3 times
    retry_delay=1.0,          # Wait 1 second between retries
    gc_time=300.0,            # Keep cached data around for 5 minutes
)
async def user(self):
    return await fetch_user(self.user_id)
```

| If you want to... | Use this option |
|-------------------|-----------------|
| Avoid UI flicker when switching between items | `keep_previous_data=True` |
| Reduce API calls for data that doesn't change often | `stale_time=60.0` (or longer) |
| Handle flaky network connections | `retries=3, retry_delay=1.0` |
| Keep data in memory longer for fast back-navigation | `gc_time=300.0` |

### Reacting to query results

Use callback decorators when a query succeeds or fails:

```python
@ps.query
async def user(self):
    return await fetch_user(self.user_id)

@user.on_success
def _on_success(self):
    print("User loaded successfully!")

@user.on_error
def _on_error(self):
    print("Failed to load user")
```

### Providing initial data

Show placeholder data immediately while the real fetch happens:

```python
@ps.query
async def user(self):
    return await fetch_user(self.user_id)

@user.initial_data
def _initial_user(self):
    return {"id": 0, "name": "Loading..."}
```

---

## Mutations

While queries are for reading, **mutations** are for writing. They don't run automatically—you call them explicitly:

```python
class UserState(ps.State):
    user_id: int = 1

    @ps.query
    async def user(self):
        return await fetch_user(self.user_id)

    @ps.mutation
    async def update_name(self, new_name: str):
        result = await save_user_name(self.user_id, new_name)
        self.user.invalidate()  # Refresh the query after saving
        return result
```

Use mutations in event handlers:

```python
@ps.component
def EditUser():
    with ps.init():
        state = UserState()

    async def save():
        await state.update_name("New Name")

    return ps.button("Save", onClick=save)
```

### Handling mutation results

Mutations support success and error callbacks:

```python
@ps.mutation
async def update_name(self, new_name: str):
    return await save_user_name(self.user_id, new_name)

@update_name.on_success
def _on_save_success(self, result):
    print(f"Saved: {result}")

@update_name.on_error
def _on_save_error(self, error):
    print(f"Save failed: {error}")
```

### Optimistic updates

Update the display immediately *before* the server responds for the snappiest UI:

```python
async def rename_user():
    # Show the change immediately (optimistic)
    state.user.set_data({"id": state.user_id, "name": "New Name"})

    # Actually save to server
    await state.update_name("New Name")

    # Refetch to make sure we're in sync
    await state.user.refetch()
```

---

## Async effects

Effects can be async, useful for background tasks or periodic updates:

```python
class PollingState(ps.State):
    data: dict = {}

    @ps.effect(lazy=True)
    async def poll(self):
        while True:
            self.data = await fetch_latest()
            await asyncio.sleep(30)

    def start_polling(self):
        self.poll.schedule()

    def stop_polling(self):
        self.poll.cancel()
```

The `lazy=True` option means the effect doesn't run automatically. Use `.schedule()` to start it and `.cancel()` to stop it.

### Controlling tracking in async code

Use `ps.Untrack()` when you need to read state without creating a dependency:

```python
async def save(self):
    with ps.Untrack():
        # Reading these won't cause the effect to rerun
        data = {"name": self.name, "email": self.email}

    await api.save(data)
```

---

## Quick reference

| I want to... | Use |
|--------------|-----|
| Fetch data that updates automatically | `@ps.query` |
| Send data to the server | `@ps.mutation` |
| Show loading state on first load | `query.is_loading` |
| Show loading state on any fetch | `query.is_fetching` |
| Manually refresh data | `query.refetch()` |
| Update UI immediately before server confirms | `query.set_data(...)` |
| Mark data as stale for lazy refresh | `query.invalidate()` |
| Run background async tasks | `@ps.effect(lazy=True)` with `.schedule()` |

## See also

- [Tutorial: Async](/docs/tutorial/08-async)
- [Tutorial: Queries and Mutations](/docs/tutorial/09-queries)
