docs/content/docs/(core)/concepts/deployment.mdx, before:

---
title: "Deployment"
---

Ready to share your Pulse app with the world? This guide walks you through building and deploying your application to production.

Pulse apps are Python backends that communicate with React frontends over WebSockets. When deploying, you need to generate the frontend code and decide how to host these two pieces.

## Code generation

Pulse generates React Router files that connect your Python routes to the React frontend. This happens automatically during development and can be triggered manually for production builds.

### How it works

When you run `pulse run app.py`, Pulse:

1. Reads your route definitions from the `App` object
2. Generates React Router configuration files in your web directory
3. Creates route components that connect to the Pulse server
4. Copies any local assets referenced by `Import` or `DynamicImport`

The generated files are placed in a `pulse/` directory inside your web app folder (by default `web/app/pulse/`).

### Configuration

Configure code generation with `CodegenConfig`:

```python
from pathlib import Path
import pulse as ps

app = ps.App(
    routes=[...],
    codegen=ps.CodegenConfig(
        web_dir=Path(__file__).parent / "web",  # Where your React app lives
        pulse_dir="pulse",                       # Subdirectory for generated files
    ),
)
```

### Manual generation for production

For production builds or CI, call `run_codegen()` directly:

```python
app = ps.App(routes=[...], codegen=ps.CodegenConfig(...))

# Generate files for a specific server address
app.run_codegen(address="https://api.example.com")
```

Pulse automatically adds the generated directory to `.gitignore`.

---

## Deployment modes

You need to decide how to host the API and frontend—together on one server, or separately.

**If you're just getting started, use single-server mode.** It's simpler to set up and works great for most applications.

| | Single-server | Subdomains |
|---|---|---|
| **Setup complexity** | Simple | More involved |
| **Best for** | Most apps, getting started | Large-scale apps, separate teams |
| **Scaling** | Scale everything together | Scale API and frontend independently |
| **Infrastructure** | One server/container | Separate API server + CDN |

### Single-server mode (recommended)

Your Pulse server handles everything: the API, WebSocket connections, and serving the React frontend.

```python
import pulse as ps

app = ps.App(
    routes=[...],
    mode="single-server",  # This is the default
    server_address="https://myapp.example.com",
)
```

Why this mode is simpler:
- **One thing to deploy** - Your Pulse server handles both the API and frontend
- **No CORS headaches** - Everything runs on the same origin
- **Cookies just work** - Session cookies are automatically configured

### Subdomains mode

Host the API and frontend separately (e.g., `api.example.com` and `app.example.com`):

```python
app = ps.App(
    routes=[...],
    mode="subdomains",
    server_address="https://api.example.com",
)
```

This mode requires more configuration:
- **CORS must be configured** - The browser needs permission to make cross-origin requests
- **Cookies need domain settings** - Session cookies must work across subdomains
- **Separate deployments** - Deploy frontend (often to a CDN) and API server separately

---

## Server address configuration

The `server_address` tells Pulse where your API will be accessible. Pulse uses this to:
- Generate the correct WebSocket URL for the React client
- Set up CORS policies
- Configure cookie domains

```python
# Development
app = ps.App(
    routes=[...],
    dev_server_address="http://localhost:8000",
)

# Production
app = ps.App(
    routes=[...],
    server_address="https://api.myapp.com",
)
```

---

## Cookie configuration

Pulse uses cookies to manage user sessions. The defaults work well for most apps. For subdomains mode or specific security requirements:

```python
from pulse import Cookie

app = ps.App(
    routes=[...],
    cookie=Cookie(
        name="pulse_session",
        domain=".example.com",       # Leading dot for subdomain sharing
        secure=True,                 # Only send over HTTPS
        samesite="lax",              # CSRF protection
        max_age_seconds=86400 * 30,  # 30 days
    ),
)
```

## CORS configuration

Pulse configures CORS automatically based on your deployment mode. For custom settings:

```python
app = ps.App(
    routes=[...],
    cors={
        "allow_origins": ["https://app.example.com"],
        "allow_credentials": True,
        "allow_methods": ["*"],
        "allow_headers": ["*"],
    },
)
```

---

## Running in production

Run your app with a production-grade ASGI server like Uvicorn:

```bash
uvicorn app:app.asgi --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

For more control over initialization, use the factory pattern:

```python
# app.py
def create_app():
    app = ps.App(routes=[...], server_address="https://api.example.com")
    app.run_codegen(address="https://api.example.com")
    return app.asgi
```

```bash
uvicorn app:create_app --factory --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

### Environment variables

| Variable | Purpose | Example |
|----------|---------|---------|
| `PULSE_ENV` | Set to `prod` for production mode | `prod` |
| `PULSE_HOST` | Server host to bind to | `0.0.0.0` |
| `PULSE_PORT` | Server port | `8000` |

Setting `PULSE_ENV=prod` enables production optimizations and disables hot reloading.

---

## AWS deployment

The `pulse-aws` package makes it easy to run Pulse on Lambda, ECS, and other AWS services:

```python
from pulse_aws import create_lambda_handler

handler = create_lambda_handler(app)
```

See the [Pulse AWS package documentation](/docs/packages/pulse-aws) for detailed guides.

Commit message:

pulse-aws update: package, example, docs

docs/content/docs/(core)/concepts/deployment.mdx, after:

---
title: "Deployment"
---

Ready to share your Pulse app with the world? This guide walks you through building and deploying your application to production.

Pulse apps are Python backends that communicate with React frontends over WebSockets. When deploying, you need to generate the frontend code and decide how to host these two pieces.

## Code generation

Pulse generates React Router files that connect your Python routes to the React frontend. This happens automatically during development and can be triggered manually for production builds.

### How it works

When you run `pulse run app.py`, Pulse:

1. Reads your route definitions from the `App` object
2. Generates React Router configuration files in your web directory
3. Creates route components that connect to the Pulse server
4. Copies any local assets referenced by `Import` or `DynamicImport`

The generated files are placed in a `pulse/` directory inside your web app folder (by default `web/app/pulse/`).

### Configuration

Configure code generation with `CodegenConfig`:

```python
from pathlib import Path
import pulse as ps

app = ps.App(
    routes=[...],
    codegen=ps.CodegenConfig(
        web_dir=Path(__file__).parent / "web",  # Where your React app lives
        pulse_dir="pulse",                       # Subdirectory for generated files
    ),
)
```

### Manual generation for production

For production builds or CI, call `run_codegen()` directly:

```python
app = ps.App(routes=[...], codegen=ps.CodegenConfig(...))

# Generate files for a specific server address
app.run_codegen(address="https://api.example.com")
```

Pulse automatically adds the generated directory to `.gitignore`.

---

## Deployment modes

You need to decide how to host the API and frontend—together on one server, or separately.

**If you're just getting started, use single-server mode.** It's simpler to set up and works great for most applications.

| | Single-server | Subdomains |
|---|---|---|
| **Setup complexity** | Simple | More involved |
| **Best for** | Most apps, getting started | Large-scale apps, separate teams |
| **Scaling** | Scale everything together | Scale API and frontend independently |
| **Infrastructure** | One server/container | Separate API server + CDN |

### Single-server mode (recommended)

Your Pulse server handles everything: the API, WebSocket connections, and serving the React frontend.

```python
import pulse as ps

app = ps.App(
    routes=[...],
    mode="single-server",  # This is the default
    server_address="https://myapp.example.com",
)
```

Why this mode is simpler:
- **One thing to deploy** - Your Pulse server handles both the API and frontend
- **No CORS headaches** - Everything runs on the same origin
- **Cookies just work** - Session cookies are automatically configured

### Subdomains mode

Host the API and frontend separately (e.g., `api.example.com` and `app.example.com`):

```python
app = ps.App(
    routes=[...],
    mode="subdomains",
    server_address="https://api.example.com",
)
```

This mode requires more configuration:
- **CORS must be configured** - The browser needs permission to make cross-origin requests
- **Cookies need domain settings** - Session cookies must work across subdomains
- **Separate deployments** - Deploy frontend (often to a CDN) and API server separately

---

## Server address configuration

The `server_address` tells Pulse where your API will be accessible. Pulse uses this to:
- Generate the correct WebSocket URL for the React client
- Set up CORS policies
- Configure cookie domains

```python
# Development
app = ps.App(
    routes=[...],
    dev_server_address="http://localhost:8000",
)

# Production
app = ps.App(
    routes=[...],
    server_address="https://api.myapp.com",
)
```

---

## Cookie configuration

Pulse uses cookies to manage user sessions. The defaults work well for most apps. For subdomains mode or specific security requirements:

```python
from pulse import Cookie

app = ps.App(
    routes=[...],
    cookie=Cookie(
        name="pulse_session",
        domain=".example.com",       # Leading dot for subdomain sharing
        secure=True,                 # Only send over HTTPS
        samesite="lax",              # CSRF protection
        max_age_seconds=86400 * 30,  # 30 days
    ),
)
```

## CORS configuration

Pulse configures CORS automatically based on your deployment mode. For custom settings:

```python
app = ps.App(
    routes=[...],
    cors={
        "allow_origins": ["https://app.example.com"],
        "allow_credentials": True,
        "allow_methods": ["*"],
        "allow_headers": ["*"],
    },
)
```

---

## Running in production

Run your app with a production-grade ASGI server like Uvicorn:

```bash
uvicorn app:app.asgi --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

For more control over initialization, use the factory pattern:

```python
# app.py
def create_app():
    app = ps.App(routes=[...], server_address="https://api.example.com")
    app.run_codegen(address="https://api.example.com")
    return app.asgi
```

```bash
uvicorn app:create_app --factory --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

### Environment variables

| Variable | Purpose | Example |
|----------|---------|---------|
| `PULSE_ENV` | Set to `prod` for production mode | `prod` |
| `PULSE_HOST` | Server host to bind to | `0.0.0.0` |
| `PULSE_PORT` | Server port | `8000` |

Setting `PULSE_ENV=prod` enables production optimizations and disables hot reloading.

---

## AWS deployment

`pulse-aws` is the current official example, not the only way to deploy Pulse. You can run Pulse anywhere you can host a long-lived Python server + WebSocket connections.

Why people use it:
- Keeps old servers alive while users are connected, so deploys don't drop sessions.
- Runs multiple versions at once with affinity routing, so you can balance users across them.

<Callout type="warn">
Unverified example. Not run in this update.
</Callout>

```bash
uv run pulse-aws deploy \
  --deployment-name prod \
  --domain app.example.com \
  --app-file src/app/main.py \
  --web-root web
```

See the [Pulse AWS package documentation](/docs/packages/pulse-aws) for detailed guides.
