docs/content/docs/(core)/advanced/refs.mdx, before:

---
title: "Refs"
---

Most of the time, you declare what your UI should look like and let Pulse handle the DOM. But sometimes you need to reach into the browser and do something imperatively: focus an input, scroll to an element, measure a component's size. That's what refs are for.

If you've used React, you might be familiar with refs. Pulse refs work differently. In React, refs are client-side—your JavaScript code holds a direct reference to a DOM node. In Pulse, refs are server-side handles that send commands over WebSocket. The ref lives in Python, but it controls an element in the browser.

## When to use refs

Refs solve a specific set of problems—DOM operations that can't be expressed declaratively:

| Use refs for | Use state for |
|--------------|---------------|
| Focusing inputs | Input values |
| Scrolling to elements | What's visible |
| Measuring element dimensions | Layout decisions |
| Triggering animations | Animation state |
| Reading properties the server doesn't know | Data your component tracks |

Here's the mental model: **state controls what appears, refs control what happens**. If you want a button to show "Submit", that's state. If you want to scroll to that button when an error occurs, that's a ref.

## The server-client bridge

When you create a ref, you're setting up a communication channel between your Python code and a specific DOM element:

```
Python (server)                    Browser (client)
    |                                   |
    |   ps.ref() creates handle         |
    |---------------------------------->|
    |                                   | Element mounts
    |   "ref:mounted" event             |
    |<----------------------------------|
    |                                   |
    |   ref.focus() sends command       |
    |---------------------------------->|
    |                                   | Element receives focus
```

This is why some ref operations are async (they need a response from the browser) while others are fire-and-forget (they just send a command).

## Fire-and-forget vs request-response

Ref methods fall into two categories:

**Fire-and-forget** methods send a command and return immediately. You don't wait for confirmation—you trust that the browser will handle it.

```python
input_ref.focus()         # Returns immediately
button_ref.click()        # Doesn't wait for click to complete
element_ref.scroll_into_view(behavior="smooth")
```

These are synchronous. Call them from any handler.

**Request-response** methods send a request and wait for the browser to reply. You need information back from the client.

```python
rect = await element_ref.measure()           # Need the dimensions
value = await input_ref.get_prop("value")    # Need the current value
await element_ref.set_style({"color": "red"}) # Wait for confirmation
```

These are async. You must `await` them.

Why the distinction? Fire-and-forget is faster—you don't pay the round-trip cost. Use it when you don't need confirmation. Use request-response when you need data back or want to ensure the operation completed.

## The mount lifecycle

A ref isn't immediately usable when you create it. The element needs to mount in the browser first:

```python
@ps.component
def Example():
    input_ref = ps.ref()

    # This would fail! The element hasn't mounted yet.
    # input_ref.focus()  # RefNotMounted error

    return ps.input(ref=input_ref)
```

You have several options for handling this:

**Option 1: Use on_mount callback**

```python
input_ref = ps.ref(on_mount=lambda: input_ref.focus())
```

The callback runs when the element mounts. This is the simplest approach for fire-and-forget operations.

**Option 2: Wait for mount explicitly**

```python
async def handle_click():
    await input_ref.wait_mounted(timeout=2.0)
    input_ref.focus()
```

Use this when you need to ensure the element exists before operating on it, especially in event handlers.

**Option 3: Check the mounted property**

```python
if input_ref.mounted:
    input_ref.focus()
```

A quick check when you're not sure if the element is available.

## Common patterns

### Auto-focus on mount

The most common use case. Focus an input when a form appears:

```python
@ps.component
def LoginForm():
    email_ref = ps.ref(on_mount=lambda: email_ref.focus())

    return ps.form(
        ps.input(ref=email_ref, type="email", placeholder="Email"),
        ps.input(type="password", placeholder="Password"),
        ps.button("Log in"),
    )
```

### Scroll to element

Bring an element into view—useful for navigating long forms or jumping to errors:

```python
@ps.component
def ScrollDemo():
    with ps.init():
        state = FormState()

    target_ref = ps.ref()

    async def scroll_to_target():
        await target_ref.wait_mounted()
        target_ref.scroll_into_view(behavior="smooth", block="center")

    return ps.div(
        ps.button("Scroll to target", onClick=scroll_to_target),
        ps.div(className="h-screen"),  # Spacer
        ps.div("Target element", ref=target_ref),
    )
```

### Measure before positioning

When you need to position something relative to another element:

```python
async def show_tooltip(target_ref, tooltip_ref):
    rect = await target_ref.measure()
    await tooltip_ref.set_style({
        "position": "absolute",
        "top": f"{rect['bottom'] + 8}px",
        "left": f"{rect['left']}px",
    })
```

### Read input value imperatively

Sometimes you want the exact current value without tracking it in state:

```python
async def get_current_input():
    value = await input_ref.get_prop("value")
    print(f"Current value: {value}")
```

This is rarely needed—usually you'd use controlled inputs with state. But it's useful for one-off reads.

## Error handling

Ref operations can fail in two ways:

**RefNotMounted**: You tried to use a ref that isn't mounted yet.

```python
from pulse import RefNotMounted

try:
    input_ref.focus()
except RefNotMounted:
    # Element doesn't exist in the browser yet
    pass
```

**RefTimeout**: You waited for mount but the element never appeared.

```python
from pulse import RefTimeout

try:
    await input_ref.wait_mounted(timeout=2.0)
except RefTimeout:
    # Element didn't mount within 2 seconds
    pass
```

A robust pattern for optional focusing:

```python
async def try_focus(ref):
    try:
        await ref.wait_mounted(timeout=1.0)
        ref.focus()
    except RefTimeout:
        pass  # Element never mounted, that's okay
```

## Using refs in loops

When creating refs inside loops, you must provide a `key` parameter:

```python
@ps.component
def ItemList():
    with ps.init():
        items = ["a", "b", "c"]

    for item in items:
        item_ref = ps.ref(key=item)  # Key required!
        # ... use item_ref
```

Without the key, Pulse can't tell which ref is which across renders. This mirrors how `ps.state()` and `@ps.effect` work in loops.

## See also

- [Reference: Refs](/docs/reference/pulse/refs) - Complete API documentation
- [Reference: Channels](/docs/reference/pulse/channels) - The underlying communication mechanism
- [Hooks](/docs/advanced/custom-hooks) - Creating custom initialization patterns

Commit message:

Add ref callbacks and out-of-render refs

docs/content/docs/(core)/advanced/refs.mdx, after:

---
title: "Refs"
---

Most of the time, you declare what your UI should look like and let Pulse handle the DOM. But sometimes you need to reach into the browser and do something imperatively: focus an input, scroll to an element, measure a component's size. That's what refs are for.

If you've used React, you might be familiar with refs. Pulse refs work differently. In React, refs are client-side—your JavaScript code holds a direct reference to a DOM node. In Pulse, refs are server-side handles that send commands over WebSocket. The ref lives in Python, but it controls an element in the browser.

## When to use refs

Refs solve a specific set of problems—DOM operations that can't be expressed declaratively:

| Use refs for | Use state for |
|--------------|---------------|
| Focusing inputs | Input values |
| Scrolling to elements | What's visible |
| Measuring element dimensions | Layout decisions |
| Triggering animations | Animation state |
| Reading properties the server doesn't know | Data your component tracks |

Here's the mental model: **state controls what appears, refs control what happens**. If you want a button to show "Submit", that's state. If you want to scroll to that button when an error occurs, that's a ref.

## The server-client bridge

When you create a ref, you're setting up a communication channel between your Python code and a specific DOM element:

```
Python (server)                    Browser (client)
    |                                   |
    |   ps.ref() creates handle         |
    |---------------------------------->|
    |                                   | Element mounts
    |   "ref:mounted" event             |
    |<----------------------------------|
    |                                   |
    |   ref.focus() sends command       |
    |---------------------------------->|
    |                                   | Element receives focus
```

This is why some ref operations are async (they need a response from the browser) while others are fire-and-forget (they just send a command).

## Fire-and-forget vs request-response

Ref methods fall into two categories:

**Fire-and-forget** methods send a command and return immediately. You don't wait for confirmation—you trust that the browser will handle it.

```python
input_ref.focus()         # Returns immediately
button_ref.click()        # Doesn't wait for click to complete
element_ref.scroll_into_view(behavior="smooth")
```

These are synchronous. Call them from any handler.

**Request-response** methods send a request and wait for the browser to reply. You need information back from the client.

```python
rect = await element_ref.measure()           # Need the dimensions
value = await input_ref.get_prop("value")    # Need the current value
await element_ref.set_style({"color": "red"}) # Wait for confirmation
```

These are async. You must `await` them.

Why the distinction? Fire-and-forget is faster—you don't pay the round-trip cost. Use it when you don't need confirmation. Use request-response when you need data back or want to ensure the operation completed.

## The mount lifecycle

A ref isn't immediately usable when you create it. The element needs to mount in the browser first:

```python
@ps.component
def Example():
    input_ref = ps.ref()

    # This would fail! The element hasn't mounted yet.
    # input_ref.focus()  # RefNotMounted error

    return ps.input(ref=input_ref)
```

You have several options for handling this:

**Option 1: Use on_mount callback**

```python
input_ref = ps.ref(on_mount=lambda: input_ref.focus())
```

The callback runs when the element mounts. This is the simplest approach for fire-and-forget operations.

**Option 2: Wait for mount explicitly**

```python
async def handle_click():
    await input_ref.wait_mounted(timeout=2.0)
    input_ref.focus()
```

Use this when you need to ensure the element exists before operating on it, especially in event handlers.

**Option 3: Check the mounted property**

```python
if input_ref.mounted:
    input_ref.focus()
```

You can also create refs outside render as long as a render session is active. Each call returns a new handle (no hook identity), which you can pass into a component later.

## Ref callbacks

If you prefer the React-style ref callback, you can pass a function to `ref=`. It receives the `Ref` on mount and `None` on unmount.

```python
import pulse as ps

@ps.component
def Example():
    def on_ref(value: ps.Ref | None):
        if value:
            value.focus()

    return ps.input(ref=on_ref)
```

A quick check when you're not sure if the element is available.

## Common patterns

### Auto-focus on mount

The most common use case. Focus an input when a form appears:

```python
@ps.component
def LoginForm():
    email_ref = ps.ref(on_mount=lambda: email_ref.focus())

    return ps.form(
        ps.input(ref=email_ref, type="email", placeholder="Email"),
        ps.input(type="password", placeholder="Password"),
        ps.button("Log in"),
    )
```

### Scroll to element

Bring an element into view—useful for navigating long forms or jumping to errors:

```python
@ps.component
def ScrollDemo():
    with ps.init():
        state = FormState()

    target_ref = ps.ref()

    async def scroll_to_target():
        await target_ref.wait_mounted()
        target_ref.scroll_into_view(behavior="smooth", block="center")

    return ps.div(
        ps.button("Scroll to target", onClick=scroll_to_target),
        ps.div(className="h-screen"),  # Spacer
        ps.div("Target element", ref=target_ref),
    )
```

### Measure before positioning

When you need to position something relative to another element:

```python
async def show_tooltip(target_ref, tooltip_ref):
    rect = await target_ref.measure()
    await tooltip_ref.set_style({
        "position": "absolute",
        "top": f"{rect['bottom'] + 8}px",
        "left": f"{rect['left']}px",
    })
```

### Read input value imperatively

Sometimes you want the exact current value without tracking it in state:

```python
async def get_current_input():
    value = await input_ref.get_prop("value")
    print(f"Current value: {value}")
```

This is rarely needed—usually you'd use controlled inputs with state. But it's useful for one-off reads.

## Error handling

Ref operations can fail in two ways:

**RefNotMounted**: You tried to use a ref that isn't mounted yet.

```python
from pulse import RefNotMounted

try:
    input_ref.focus()
except RefNotMounted:
    # Element doesn't exist in the browser yet
    pass
```

**RefTimeout**: You waited for mount but the element never appeared.

```python
from pulse import RefTimeout

try:
    await input_ref.wait_mounted(timeout=2.0)
except RefTimeout:
    # Element didn't mount within 2 seconds
    pass
```

A robust pattern for optional focusing:

```python
async def try_focus(ref):
    try:
        await ref.wait_mounted(timeout=1.0)
        ref.focus()
    except RefTimeout:
        pass  # Element never mounted, that's okay
```

## Using refs in loops

When creating refs inside loops, you must provide a `key` parameter:

```python
@ps.component
def ItemList():
    with ps.init():
        items = ["a", "b", "c"]

    for item in items:
        item_ref = ps.ref(key=item)  # Key required!
        # ... use item_ref
```

Without the key, Pulse can't tell which ref is which across renders. This mirrors how `ps.state()` and `@ps.effect` work in loops.

## See also

- [Reference: Refs](/docs/reference/pulse/refs) - Complete API documentation
- [Reference: Channels](/docs/reference/pulse/channels) - The underlying communication mechanism
- [Hooks](/docs/advanced/custom-hooks) - Creating custom initialization patterns
